The excellent Polish historian of the early modern period, Władysław Konopczyński, wrote in 1921: “To which of us Poles at an adolescent age does the 
Hetman-King from the epics not speak to? That armoured Polonus, moustachioed, kontusz-wearing and so wonderfully colourful, whom does he not charm with the rattle of armour, 
the wave of the mace, the waving of the banners in the wind, the flutter of thousands of Hussar wings? Who of us more mature ones is not moved by the lyricism of one of the most cherished loves
 that the history of Polish hearts knows? Which one of the most mature researchers is not moved by the tragedy of the fall of his eagle wings after his lofty flight?” It is no surprise then, 
 that the figure of Jan III Sobieski holds a special place in Polish culture and tradition, so strongly affecting the imagination of his countrymen living in different times. It is therefore 
 worth finding out how King Jan III was perceived by his contemporaries and what the following generations of Poles worshipped him for. The background and social conditions in which the cult of
 e conqueror of Turkish power was born and later developed should be noted.

Undoubtedly, King Jan III Sobieski can be considered as a type of Sarmatian knight, personifying the best national values of the 17th century – that turbulent era in which he lived – but at 
the same time being a reflection of more than one of his faults and shortcomings. This man, born into a senatorial family, with a highly educated personal culture, having knowledge of the wide 
world, which he gained during his travels to Western Europe and Turkey, speaking excellent Latin and French, and better or worse Italian, German and English, as well as Tatar and Turkish, felt 
himself above all to be a Polish nobleman. He proved to be the most perfect type of the nobleman-Pole, with all his vices and virtues. Elected to the throne in 1674, he became 
the personification of the ideals and hopes of the Polish society, plagued in the 17th century by numerous devastating wars. As the victorious Hetman from Chocim (Khotyn) in 1673,
 and then the victorious king, conqueror of the Turkish power in Vienna in 1683, Sobieski was considered a national hero and a leader fighting in defence of the Christian faith and his homeland. 
 Gradually, around his person, a legend was born.

It must be noted, however, that the king himself contributed to the legend himself to some extent. It was no accident that almost immediately after the Battle of Vienna, Jan III saw to it that 
his victory was given the widest publicity. To this end, he sent to Pope Innocent XI, as well as many European monarchs, letters and detailed reports of the course of the battle.
All of civilised Europe knew the first words of the letter to the Holy Father: Venimus, vidimus et Deus vicit (we came, we saw, and God won), which were a paraphrase of the words 
once spoken by Julius Caesar. Similarly, his letter to Queen Marysieńka, written in the vizier tents the day after the battle, began with the words “God and Our Lord, forever blessed, gave 
victory and glory to our nation, of which kind the past centuries never heard” and instructed Marysieńka to spread the news to the entire world as the best kind of newspaper, so that as many 
people as possible could learn about the Vienna victory. It is known that the famous letter of Jan IIII, already in 1683 translated into many languages and published in print, circulated in 
nearly all European courts.

The triumphal entry of Jan III into Krakow took place after the end of the military campaign on 23 December 1683. During his entry to the Wawel cathedral, a thanksgiving “Te Deum” was sung, 
and the King hung at the tomb of St Stanislaus the great banner of the vizier that he acquired at Vienna. Similar celebrations were held throughout the Commonwealth. 
The famous Gdańsk astronomer Johannes Hevelius (1611–1687), in order to pay homage to the king, named a new constellation he had discovered the Shield of Sobieski (Scutum Sobiescianum). 
In Jesuit schools, as well as protestant middleschools, numerous dramas were staged, dedicated to the victory of the Polish monarch.

The victory at Vienna had wide repercussions in the contemporary Polish literature. In a particular way, a whole range of writers and not entirely top-flight panegyrists contributed to 
the creation of the legend around the king by – in a more or less successful way – sang the praises of the conqueror of Islam in verse and in prose, in Latin and in Polish. Through their works, 
ey created an aura of heroism around Sobieski. Considered to be the greatest hero of his time, he reached the heights of Olympus while he was still alive. He was compared to various heroes of 
antiquity and the Bible, such as the Roman god of war Mars, or Moses, stating that the Polish king, as the Jewish patriarch in his time, saved his people from the armies of the pharaoh, that is 
the Turks. Often, Jan III was set alongside such prominent leaders as Alexander the Great, Pompey and Julius Caesar. Wespazjan Kochowski (1633–1700), who took part in the Vienna expedition as a 
royal historian and described it in the poem The Work of God or Songs of Liberated Vienna (1683), saw in Sobieski a superhuman greatness, a new Messiah, to whom Providence had entrusted 
the mission of defending Christianity. Often, in contemporary reports and works composed for the occasion, the relief of Vienna was compared to the crusade wars, as a natural continuation 
of the great tradition of the war of the cross with the crescent moon. Therefore, the conqueror of Turks was bestowed the title of the new Polish Gofred, comparing him to the popular 
17th century figure of Godfrey of Bouillon (1061–1100), the leader of the First Crusade and ruler of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
